docs/README.md, before:

# AlgoKit TypeScript Utilities

A set of core Algorand utilities written in TypeScript and released via npm that make it easier to build, test and deploy solutions on the Algorand Blockchain, including APIs, console apps and dApps. This project is part of [AlgoKit](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli).

The goal of this library is to provide intuitive, productive utility functions that make it easier, quicker and safer to build applications on Algorand. Largely these functions provide a thin wrapper over the underlying Algorand SDK, but provide a higher level interface with sensible defaults and capabilities for common tasks that make development faster and easier.

Note: If you prefer Python there's an equivalent [Python utility library](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-utils-py).

[Core principles](#core-principles) | [Installation](#installation) | [Usage](#usage) | [Config and logging](#config-and-logging) | [Capabilities](#capabilities) | [Reference docs](#reference-documentation)

# Core principles

This library is designed with the following principles:

- **Modularity** - This library is a thin wrapper of modular building blocks over the Algorand SDK; the primitives from the underlying Algorand SDK are exposed and used wherever possible so you can opt-in to which parts of this library you want to use without having to use an all or nothing approach.
- **Type-safety** - This library provides strong TypeScript support with effort put into creating types that provide good type safety and intellisense.
- **Productivity** - This library is built to make solution developers highly productive; it has a number of mechanisms to make common code easier and terser to write

# Installation

This library can be installed from NPM using your favourite npm client, e.g.:

```
npm install @algorandfoundation/algokit-utils
```

## Peer Dependencies

This library requires `algosdk` as a peer dependency. Ensure you have it installed in your project.

# Usage

To use this library simply include the following at the top of your file:

```typescript
import { AlgorandClient, Config } from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils'
```

As well as `AlgorandClient` and `Config`, you can use intellisense to auto-complete the various types that you can import withing the {} in your favourite Integrated Development Environment (IDE), or you can refer to the [reference documentation](./code/modules/index.md).

> [!WARNING]
> Previous versions of AlgoKit Utils encouraged you to include an import that looks like this (note the subtle difference of the extra `* as`):
>
> ```typescript
> import * as algokit from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils'
> ```
>
> This version will still work, but it exposes an older, function-based interface to the functionality that is in the process of being deprecated. The recommended way to use AlgoKit Utils is via the `AlgorandClient` class mentioned below, which is easier and more convenient to use. Some functionality won't yet be migrated to the new approach and this old approach will be needed, but the documentation pages will indicate when this is the case.

The main entrypoint to the bulk of the functionality is the `AlgorandClient` class, most of the time you can get started by typing `algokit.AlgorandClient.` and choosing one of the static initialisation methods to create an [Algorand client](./capabilities/algorand-client.md), e.g.:

```typescript
// Point to the network configured through environment variables or
//  if no environment variables it will point to the default LocalNet
//  configuration
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromEnvironment()
// Point to default LocalNet configuration
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.defaultLocalNet()
// Point to TestNet using AlgoNode free tier
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.testNet()
// Point to MainNet using AlgoNode free tier
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.mainNet()
// Point to a pre-created algod client
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromClients({ algod })
// Point to pre-created algod, indexer and kmd clients
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromClients({ algod, indexer, kmd })
// Point to custom configuration for algod
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromConfig({ algodConfig })
// Point to custom configuration for algod, indexer and kmd
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromConfig({ algodConfig, indexerConfig, kmdConfig })
```

## Testing

AlgoKit Utils contains a module that helps you write automated tests against an Algorand network (usually LocalNet). These tests can run locally on a developer's machine, or on a Continuous Integration server.

To use the automated testing functionality, you can import the testing module:

```typescript
import * as algotesting from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils/testing'
```

Or, you can generally get away with just importing the `algorandFixture` since it exposes the rest of the functionality in a manner that is easy to integrate with an underlying test framework like Jest or vitest:

```typescript
import { algorandFixture } from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils/testing'
```

To see how to use it consult the [testing capability page](capabilities/testing.md) or to see what's available look at the [reference documentation](./code/modules/testing.md).

## Types

If you want to extend or pass around any of the types the various functions take then they are all defined in isolated modules under the `types` namespace. This is to provide a better intellisense experience without overwhelming you with hundreds of types. If you determine a type to import then you can import it like so:

```typescript
import {<type>} from '@algorandfoundation/types/<module>'
```

Where `<type>` would be replaced with the type and `<module>` would be replaced with the module. You can use intellisense to discover the modules and types in your favourite IDE, or you can explore the [types modules in the reference documentation](./code/README.md#modules).

# Config and logging

To configure the AlgoKit Utils library you can make use of the `algokit.Config` object, which has a `configure` method that lets you configure some or all of the configuration options.

## Logging

AlgoKit has an in-built logging abstraction that allows the library to issue log messages without coupling the library to a particular logging library. This means you can access the AlgoKit Utils logs within your existing logging library if you have one.

To do this you need to create a logging translator that exposes the following interface ([`Logger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#logger)):

```typescript
export type Logger = {
  error(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  warn(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  info(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  verbose(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  debug(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
}
```

Note: this interface type is directly compatible with [Winston](https://github.com/winstonjs/winston) so you should be able to pass AlgoKit a Winston logger.

By default, the [`consoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#consolelogger) is set as the logger, which will send log messages to the various `console.*` methods for all logs apart from verbose logs. There is also a [`nullLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#nulllogger) if you want to disable logging, or various leveled console loggers: [`verboseConsoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#verboseconsolelogger) (also outputs verbose logs), [`infoConsoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#infoconsolelogger) (only outputs info, warning and error logs), [`warningConsoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#warningconsolelogger) (only outputs warning and error logs).

If you want to override the logger you can use the following:

```typescript
algokit.configure({ logger: myLogger })
```

To retrieve the current debug state you can use [`algokit.Config.logger`](./code/interfaces/types_config.Config.md). To get a logger that is optionally set to the null logger based on a boolean flag you can use the [`algokit.Config.getLogger(useNullLogger)`](./code/classes/types_config.UpdatableConfig.md#getlogger) function.

## Debug mode

To turn on debug mode you can use the following:

```typescript
algokit.configure({ debug: true })
```

To retrieve the current debug state you can use [`algokit.Config.debug`](./code/interfaces/types_config.Config.md).

This will turn on things like automatic tracing, more verbose logging and [advanced debugging](./capabilities/debugging.md). It's likely this option will result in extra HTTP calls to algod so worth being careful when it's turned on.

If you want to temporarily turn it on you can use the [`withDebug`](./code/classes/types_config.UpdatableConfig.md#withdebug) function:

```typescript
algokit.Config.withDebug(() => {
  // Do stuff with algokit.Config.debug set to true
})
```

# Capabilities

The library helps you interact with and develop against the Algorand blockchain with a series of end-to-end capabilities as described below:

- [**AlgorandClient**](./capabilities/algorand-client.md) - The key entrypoint to the AlgoKit Utils functionality
- Core capabilities
  - [**Client management**](./capabilities/client.md) - Creation of (auto-retry) algod, indexer and kmd clients against various networks resolved from environment or specified configuration
  - [**Account management**](./capabilities/account.md) - Creation and use of accounts including mnemonic, rekeyed, multisig, transaction signer ([useWallet](https://github.com/TxnLab/use-wallet) for dApps and Atomic Transaction Composer compatible signers), idempotent KMD accounts and environment variable injected
  - [**Algo amount handling**](./capabilities/amount.md) - Reliable and terse specification of microAlgo and Algo amounts and conversion between them
  - [**Transaction management**](./capabilities/transaction.md) - Ability to send single, grouped or Atomic Transaction Composer transactions with consistent and highly configurable semantics, including configurable control of transaction notes (including ARC-0002), logging, fees, multiple sender account types, and sending behaviour
- Higher-order use cases
  - [**App management**](./capabilities/app.md) - Creation, updating, deleting, calling (ABI and otherwise) smart contract apps and the metadata associated with them (including state and boxes)
  - [**App deployment**](./capabilities/app-deploy.md) - Idempotent (safely retryable) deployment of an app, including deploy-time immutability and permanence control and TEAL template substitution
  - [**ARC-0032 Application Spec client**](./capabilities/app-client.md) - Builds on top of the App management and App deployment capabilities to provide a high productivity application client that works with ARC-0032 application spec defined smart contracts (e.g. via Beaker)
  - [**Algo transfers**](./capabilities/transfer.md) - Ability to easily initiate algo transfers between accounts, including dispenser management and idempotent account funding
  - [**Automated testing**](./capabilities/testing.md) - Terse, robust automated testing primitives that work across any testing framework (including jest and vitest) to facilitate fixture management, quickly generating isolated and funded test accounts, transaction logging, indexer wait management and log capture
  - [**Indexer lookups / searching**](./capabilities/indexer.md) - Type-safe indexer API wrappers (no more `Record<string, any>` pain), including automatic pagination control

# Reference documentation

We have [auto-generated reference documentation for the code](./code/README.md).

# Roadmap

This library will naturally evolve with any logical developer experience improvements needed to facilitate the [AlgoKit](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli) roadmap as it evolves.

Likely future capability additions include:

- Typed application client (similar to [beaker-ts](https://github.com/algorand-devrel/beaker-ts))
- Asset management
- Expanded indexer API wrapper support

Commit message:

docs: Added up to date documentation for rekeyAccount, AlgorandClient, asset, dispenser client, indexer, testing, transfer

docs/README.md, after:

# AlgoKit TypeScript Utilities

A set of core Algorand utilities written in TypeScript and released via npm that make it easier to build, test and deploy solutions on the Algorand Blockchain, including APIs, console apps and dApps. This project is part of [AlgoKit](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli).

The goal of this library is to provide intuitive, productive utility functions that make it easier, quicker and safer to build applications on Algorand. Largely these functions provide a thin wrapper over the underlying Algorand SDK, but provide a higher level interface with sensible defaults and capabilities for common tasks that make development faster and easier.

Note: If you prefer Python there's an equivalent [Python utility library](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-utils-py).

[Core principles](#core-principles) | [Installation](#installation) | [Usage](#usage) | [Config and logging](#config-and-logging) | [Capabilities](#capabilities) | [Reference docs](#reference-documentation)

# Core principles

This library is designed with the following principles:

- **Modularity** - This library is a thin wrapper of modular building blocks over the Algorand SDK; the primitives from the underlying Algorand SDK are exposed and used wherever possible so you can opt-in to which parts of this library you want to use without having to use an all or nothing approach.
- **Type-safety** - This library provides strong TypeScript support with effort put into creating types that provide good type safety and intellisense.
- **Productivity** - This library is built to make solution developers highly productive; it has a number of mechanisms to make common code easier and terser to write

# Installation

This library can be installed from NPM using your favourite npm client, e.g.:

```
npm install @algorandfoundation/algokit-utils
```

## Peer Dependencies

This library requires `algosdk` as a peer dependency. Ensure you have it installed in your project.

# Usage

To use this library simply include the following at the top of your file:

```typescript
import { AlgorandClient, Config } from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils'
```

As well as `AlgorandClient` and `Config`, you can use intellisense to auto-complete the various types that you can import withing the {} in your favourite Integrated Development Environment (IDE), or you can refer to the [reference documentation](./code/modules/index.md).

> [!WARNING]
> Previous versions of AlgoKit Utils encouraged you to include an import that looks like this (note the subtle difference of the extra `* as algokit`):
>
> ```typescript
> import * as algokit from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils'
> ```
>
> This version will still work, but it exposes an older, function-based interface to the functionality that is in the process of being deprecated. The recommended way to use AlgoKit Utils is via the `AlgorandClient` class mentioned below, which is easier and more convenient to use. Some functionality won't yet be migrated to the new approach and this old approach will be needed, but the documentation pages will indicate when this is the case.

The main entrypoint to the bulk of the functionality is the `AlgorandClient` class, most of the time you can get started by typing `AlgorandClient.` and choosing one of the static initialisation methods to create an [Algorand client](./capabilities/algorand-client.md), e.g.:

```typescript
// Point to the network configured through environment variables or
//  if no environment variables it will point to the default LocalNet
//  configuration
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromEnvironment()
// Point to default LocalNet configuration
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.defaultLocalNet()
// Point to TestNet using AlgoNode free tier
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.testNet()
// Point to MainNet using AlgoNode free tier
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.mainNet()
// Point to a pre-created algod client
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromClients({ algod })
// Point to pre-created algod, indexer and kmd clients
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromClients({ algod, indexer, kmd })
// Point to custom configuration for algod
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromConfig({ algodConfig })
// Point to custom configuration for algod, indexer and kmd
const algorand = algokit.AlgorandClient.fromConfig({ algodConfig, indexerConfig, kmdConfig })
```

## Testing

AlgoKit Utils contains a module that helps you write automated tests against an Algorand network (usually LocalNet). These tests can run locally on a developer's machine, or on a Continuous Integration server.

To use the automated testing functionality, you can import the testing module:

```typescript
import * as algotesting from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils/testing'
```

Or, you can generally get away with just importing the `algorandFixture` since it exposes the rest of the functionality in a manner that is easy to integrate with an underlying test framework like Jest or vitest:

```typescript
import { algorandFixture } from '@algorandfoundation/algokit-utils/testing'
```

To see how to use it consult the [testing capability page](capabilities/testing.md) or to see what's available look at the [reference documentation](./code/modules/testing.md).

## Types

If you want to extend or pass around any of the types the various functions take then they are all defined in isolated modules under the `types` namespace. This is to provide a better intellisense experience without overwhelming you with hundreds of types. If you determine a type to import then you can import it like so:

```typescript
import {<type>} from '@algorandfoundation/types/<module>'
```

Where `<type>` would be replaced with the type and `<module>` would be replaced with the module. You can use intellisense to discover the modules and types in your favourite IDE, or you can explore the [types modules in the reference documentation](./code/README.md#modules).

# Config and logging

To configure the AlgoKit Utils library you can make use of the `algokit.Config` object, which has a `configure` method that lets you configure some or all of the configuration options.

## Logging

AlgoKit has an in-built logging abstraction that allows the library to issue log messages without coupling the library to a particular logging library. This means you can access the AlgoKit Utils logs within your existing logging library if you have one.

To do this you need to create a logging translator that exposes the following interface ([`Logger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#logger)):

```typescript
export type Logger = {
  error(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  warn(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  info(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  verbose(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
  debug(message: string, ...optionalParams: unknown[]): void
}
```

Note: this interface type is directly compatible with [Winston](https://github.com/winstonjs/winston) so you should be able to pass AlgoKit a Winston logger.

By default, the [`consoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#consolelogger) is set as the logger, which will send log messages to the various `console.*` methods for all logs apart from verbose logs. There is also a [`nullLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#nulllogger) if you want to disable logging, or various leveled console loggers: [`verboseConsoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#verboseconsolelogger) (also outputs verbose logs), [`infoConsoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#infoconsolelogger) (only outputs info, warning and error logs), [`warningConsoleLogger`](./code/modules/types_logging.md#warningconsolelogger) (only outputs warning and error logs).

If you want to override the logger you can use the following:

```typescript
algokit.configure({ logger: myLogger })
```

To retrieve the current debug state you can use [`algokit.Config.logger`](./code/interfaces/types_config.Config.md). To get a logger that is optionally set to the null logger based on a boolean flag you can use the [`algokit.Config.getLogger(useNullLogger)`](./code/classes/types_config.UpdatableConfig.md#getlogger) function.

## Debug mode

To turn on debug mode you can use the following:

```typescript
algokit.configure({ debug: true })
```

To retrieve the current debug state you can use [`algokit.Config.debug`](./code/interfaces/types_config.Config.md).

This will turn on things like automatic tracing, more verbose logging and [advanced debugging](./capabilities/debugging.md). It's likely this option will result in extra HTTP calls to algod so worth being careful when it's turned on.

If you want to temporarily turn it on you can use the [`withDebug`](./code/classes/types_config.UpdatableConfig.md#withdebug) function:

```typescript
algokit.Config.withDebug(() => {
  // Do stuff with algokit.Config.debug set to true
})
```

# Capabilities

The library helps you interact with and develop against the Algorand blockchain with a series of end-to-end capabilities as described below:

- [**AlgorandClient**](./capabilities/algorand-client.md) - The key entrypoint to the AlgoKit Utils functionality
- **Core capabilities**
  - [**Client management**](./capabilities/client.md) - Creation of (auto-retry) algod, indexer and kmd clients against various networks resolved from environment or specified configuration, and creation of other API clients (e.g. TestNet Dispenser API and app clients)
  - [**Account management**](./capabilities/account.md) - Creation, use, and management of accounts including mnemonic, rekeyed, multisig, transaction signer ([useWallet](https://github.com/TxnLab/use-wallet) for dApps and Atomic Transaction Composer compatible signers), idempotent KMD accounts and environment variable injected
  - [**Algo amount handling**](./capabilities/amount.md) - Reliable, explicit, and terse specification of microAlgo and Algo amounts and safe conversion between them
  - [**Transaction management**](./capabilities/transaction.md) - Ability to construct and send single and atomically grouped transactions with consistent and highly configurable semantics, including configurable control of transaction notes, logging, fees, validity, signing, and sending behaviour
- **Higher-order use cases**
  - [**Asset management**](./capabilities/asset.md) - Creation, transfer, destroying, opting in and out and managing Algorand Standard Assets
  - [**Typed application clients**](./capabilities/typed-app-clients.md) - Type-safe application clients that are [generated](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli/blob/main/docs/features/generate.md#1-typed-clients) from ARC-0032 application spec files and allow you to intuitively and productively interact with a deployed app, which is the recommended way of interacting with apps and builds on top of the following capabilities:
    - [**ARC-0032 Application Spec client**](./capabilities/app-client.md) - Builds on top of the App management and App deployment capabilities (below) to provide a high productivity application client that works with ARC-0032 application spec defined smart contracts
    - [**App management**](./capabilities/app.md) - Creation, updating, deleting, calling (ABI and otherwise) smart contract apps and the metadata associated with them (including state and boxes)
    - [**App deployment**](./capabilities/app-deploy.md) - Idempotent (safely retryable) deployment of an app, including deploy-time immutability and permanence control and TEAL template substitution
  - [**Algo transfers (payments)**](./capabilities/transfer.md) - Ability to easily initiate algo transfers between accounts, including dispenser management and idempotent account funding
  - [**Automated testing**](./capabilities/testing.md) - Terse, robust automated testing primitives that work across any testing framework (including jest and vitest) to facilitate fixture management, quickly generating isolated and funded test accounts, transaction logging, indexer wait management and log capture
  - [**Indexer lookups / searching**](./capabilities/indexer.md) - Type-safe indexer API wrappers (no `Record<string, any>` pain from the SDK client), including automatic pagination control

# Reference documentation

We have [auto-generated reference documentation for the code](./code/README.md).
